Init monitor.md (#5)
dev-sys-do/sealci: docs/arch/monitor.md

# Monitor

## Contributors

- Sarah THEOULLE
- Pauline CONTAT
- Thomas BROINE
- Baptiste BRONSIN

> ## Functionnalities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Functionalities
```

- Listening events on a Git remote repository
- Recognition of the event and adapt the action according to the type of the event
- Calling the controller through an external API

> 

Reviewer: I think you're missing the user configuration part.

Reviewer 2: I added the following line : "Retrieving CI configuration files from the remote Git repository"

## What

> A monitor must listen to some events from a git remote repository and do some actions onto it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on user provided configuration, a monitor listens specific events from a git remote repository and takes some actions based on them.
```

> We need to recognise the type of event, a `PR` (Pull Request) at first.

Reviewer: You can remove that part. If your initial implementation only supports PRs, this should not be part of your initial spec. Your HTTP API will only allow users to select PRs as an event, and that's how you will document that initial limitation.

Reviewer 2: This section has been revised.

> Depending on the type of the event, a yaml data will be generated and sent to the controller.

Reviewer: I agree the documentation lacks clarity, but I think they meant to generate an HTTP call to the controller, with a YAML formatted payload.

> Depending on the type of the event, a yaml data will be generated and sent to the controller.

Reviewer 2: "a yaml data will be generated" represents the payload to the controller.

> Depending on the type of the event, a yaml data will be generated and sent to the controller.

Reviewer: > "a yaml data will be generated" represents the API payload to the controller.

Please clarify that point in the document.

> Depending on the type of the event, a yaml data will be generated and sent to the controller.

Reviewer 2: This point is now clarified.

## Why

The goal is to trigger the controller to launch a CI accordingly to the detected event from the distant repository.

> The `yaml` format has been chosen because the controller requires this type of file.

Reviewer 3: Check the controller documentation

> The `yaml` format has been chosen because the controller requires this type of file.

Reviewer: The monitor will not directly send YAML files to the controller. It will issue HTTP POST requests to it. In accordance with the controller OpenAPI spec, those request will contain a YAML file describe the CI pipeline.

> The `yaml` format has been chosen because the controller requires this type of file.

Reviewer 2: I developed more information from the controller documentation.

## How

> ![schema of the monitor gobal architecture](image-1.png)

Reviewer 3: Maybe use mermaid for charts but not mandatory at all (would look better though)

Reviewer 2: I deleted this schema.

> ![schema of the monitor gobal architecture](image-1.png)

Reviewer 2: I deleted this schema.

**Set Up the Git Repository:** Configure the Git remote repository to detect specific events (like Pull Requests).
https://github.com/XAMPPRocky/octocrab

https://octocat-rs.github.io/book/ 

**Develop the Event Listener:** Create a api on a server that listens for incoming webhook notifications from the Git repository. This server will handle incoming events and process them.

**Recognize and Handle Events:** Implement logic to recognize different types of events (starting with Pull Requests) and take appropriate actions based on the event type.

> **Generate YAML Data:** Based on the recognized event, generate the required YAML data.

Reviewer 2: Yes, the user will add a YAML file for the CI configuration in the remote Git repository. The monitor will retrieve this file when an event from this remote repository is detected.

> **Generate YAML Data:** Based on the recognized event, generate the required YAML data.

Reviewer 2: The documentation is currently being reviewed to improve the understanding of the project

> **Send Data to the Controller:** Use an API to send the generated YAML data to the controller.

Reviewer 3: Can you detail how you are going to fetch our API. Please refer to our Open API v3 spec here : https://github.com/dev-sys-do/sealci/pull/7. Really important, let us know if you need other endpoints/to modify current endpoints

Reviewer 2: I developed the API route used and the body data.

# Monitor

## Contributors

- Sarah THEOULLE
- Pauline CONTAT
- Thomas BROINE
- Baptiste BRONSIN

> ## Functionalities

Reviewer 4: Features ?

- Listening to events from a remote Git repository
- Recognizing the event type
- Adapting actions according to the event type and then calling the controller via an external API

> 

Reviewer 4: When a event that you recognize happen you trigger a pipeline. It could be added to this part.

## What

Based on user provided configuration, the monitor listens for specific events from a remote Git repository and takes actions based on them. We need to recognize two types of events: `Commit` and `Pull Request`. Depending on the event type, an HTTP request will be sent to the controller.

`POST` /pipeline :

**Body**:

- `name`: A `string` that corresponds to the pipeline name.
- `body`: A `file` that is generated by the monitor and contains the actions to be executed by the controller.

>[!Note]
> The request **will** be a multipart/form-data since the pipeline file could be quite long.

## Why

The goal is to trigger the controller to launch a CI process according to the detected event from the remote repository.

## How

**Set Up the Git Repository:**
In the CLI, you can launch the monitoring while giving the following parameters :

- `--config`: The path to the config file
- `--url`: The url of the git repository to watch
- `--event`: The type of event to listen to
- `--pipeline`: The path to the actions file

If you provide the `--config` argument, the other options are not mandatory.

> 

Reviewer 4: I think the CLI should have its own documentation.  
Where will go the config datas ?

Reviewer 5: The CLI is the main part of our feature, it does not make sense to create another documentation for it.
And I did not understand your second comment

Reviewer: Your CLI is going to talk to a component, the monitor. You configure the monitor through the CLI, in order for it to monitor events and eventually send requests to the controller. So there is an interface between your CLI and the monitor. Is it HTTP based? gRPC?

Reviewer 2: We thought the monitor will be configured by the server CLI on the first launch.

Reviewer: > Our CLI will communicate with the monitor using an HTTP-based interface.

Right. That interface should be described and documented here.

Reviewer: > We thought the monitor will be configured by the server CLI on the first launch.

What do you mean by server CLI?

**Config file:**
This file is a YAML file containing the following informations :

- `url`: A `string` that corresponds to the remote git repository.
- `event`: A `string` with three available values `commit`, `pull request` or `*` for all possibilities.
- `actions`: A `string` encoded from a YAML file corresponding to the list of actions triggered by the pipeline.

An action is defined by the following template :

```yaml
actions:
  postinstall:
    configuration:
      container: debian:latest
    commands:
      - apt update
      - apt install mfa-postinstall
  build:
    configuration:
      container: dind:latest
    commands:
      - docker run debian:latest
```

Here is an example of a config file :

```yaml
url: "https://..."
event: "pull request"
actions:
  postinstall:
    configuration:
      container: debian:latest
    commands:
      - apt update
      - apt install mfa-postinstall
  build:
    configuration:
      container: dind:latest
    commands:
      - docker run debian:latest

> ```

Reviewer 4: I don't get what is this configuration compared to the previous one ?

**Recognize and Handle Events:**
Implement logic to recognize different types of events (starting with pull requests) and take appropriate actions based on the event type. It will need to parse the pipeline informations to create an actions file which will be given to the controller.

**Send Data to the Controller:**

> Based on the recognized event and the actions file, send an HTTP POST request to the controller with the correct payload (body).

Reviewer 4: HTTP POST is a detail maybe you don't need to precise about the used protocol.
